README.md, before:

# University of Texas at Austin Libraries
## Southern Architect AI Cataloging Project

### Project Overview
This code is part of an ongoing project focused on cataloging the University of Texas at Austin's collection of Southern Architect and Building News journals using Large Language Models (LLMs) to assist in the first-pass metadata creation process. Our research project evaluates the effectiveness of LLMs in enhancing cataloging workflows. In the larger project, we considered both API and web-based interaction with Large Language Models for metadata creation. We presented on this topic at TCDL 2025, and look forward to presenting our work again this year at the DCMI Annual Conference and the ASIS&T Annual Meeting.

[Southern Architect and Building News](https://collections.lib.utexas.edu/?f%5Bmods_relatedItem_titleInfo_title_source_t%5D%5B%5D=Southern+Architect+and+Building+News) was an illustrated monthly journal devoted to the interests of architects, builders, and the hardware trade. It was published from 1882-1932. The collection is currently housed in the Architecture and Planning Library Special Collections at the University of Texas Libraries, The University of Texas at Austin.

### Project Goals
Initially, we tested Large Language Models' ability to contribute effectively in the following metadata tasks: OCR creation/improvement, summarization, named entity extraction, and subject heading assignment. The current implementation has evolved into a comprehensive 5-step workflow that integrates controlled vocabularies and produces scholarly-quality archival metadata.

### Workflow Architecture

The processing pipeline consists of five integrated steps that transform raw OCR text or images into comprehensive archival metadata:

#### Step 1: Initial Metadata Extraction
**Scripts**: `southern_architect_step1_text.py`, `southern_architect_step1_image.py`
- Processes OCR text files or image files using OpenAI models
- Generates comprehensive metadata including text transcriptions, content summaries, visual descriptions (image script only), and initial entity extraction
- Supports both individual and batch processing with automatic cost optimization
- Creates Excel workbooks with thumbnails and detailed analysis sheets

#### Step 2: Multi-Vocabulary Enhancement
**Script**: `southern_architect_step2.py`
- Uses 'topics' and geographic entities to search for controlled vocabulary terms
- Queries multiple authoritative sources:
  - **LCSH** (Library of Congress Subject Headings)
  - **FAST** (Faceted Application of Subject Terminology)
  - **Getty AAT** (Art & Architecture Thesaurus)
  - **Getty TGN** (Thesaurus of Geographic Names)
- Caching and comprehensive API logging
- Limited to 3 terms per vocabulary to limit text size of inputs in the next step

#### Step 3: AI-Powered Vocabulary Selection
**Script**: `southern_architect_step3.py`
- Uses OpenAI models to select the most appropriate terms from Step 2 results
- Prompt applies scholarly criteria for historical accuracy and geographical relevance
- Generates page-level metadata files that include OCR
- Creates issue content indexes with comprehensive metadata
- Produces vocabulary mapping report with selection indicators

#### Step 4: Issue-Level Synthesis
**Script**: `southern_architect_step4.py`
- Synthesizes scholarly issue-level descriptions using AI
- LLM selects top 10 subject headings per issue from previously chosen page-level vocabulary terms
- Notes geographic terms with frequency analysis
- Creates comprehensive issue metadata files for each journal issue

#### Step 5: Entity Authority File Creation
**Script**: `southern_architect_step5.py`
- Builds comprehensive authority record for named entities
- Classifies entities by type (Person, Firm, Building, Organization, etc.)
- Tracks frequency, temporal distribution, and variant forms
- Creates both structured JSON and human-readable authority files

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8 or newer
- OpenAI API key
- Required Python packages (see requirements.txt)

### Environment Setup
```bash
# Clone repository
git clone [southern-architect-git-url]

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Set environment variables
export OPENAI_API_KEY="your-api-key-here"
```

### Directory Structure
```
southern_architect/CODE/
├── image_folders/
│   └── {collection}/
│       ├── {issue_1_folder_starting_with_year - e.g.'1917-05-39'}/
│       │   ├── page001.txt (or .jpg/.png)
│       │   ├── page002.txt (or .jpg/.png)
│       │   └── ...
        ├── {issue_2_folder_starting_with_year - e.g.'1924-10-50'}/
            └── ...
├── output_folders/
│   └── SABN_Metadata_Created_{date}_Time_{time}/

```

## Usage

### Complete Workflow (Recommended)
```bash
# Interactive mode - prompts for workflow type
python southern_architect_run.py

# Specify workflow type
python southern_architect_run.py --workflow text
python southern_architect_run.py --workflow image # best results

# Custom model selection
python southern_architect_run.py --workflow text --step1-model gpt-4o --step3-model gpt-4o-mini
```

## Cost Management

### Estimated Costs (per 1,000 pages)
- **GPT-4o-mini**: $0.52 (text) / $1.15 (image)
- **GPT-4o**: $8.77 (text) / $10.82 (image)
- **Claude Sonnet 3.5**: $11.18 (text) / $14.16 (image)

### Cost Optimization Strategies
1. **Batch Processing**: Use for 50% cost reduction on large collections
2. **Model Selection**: Use GPT-4o-mini for cost-sensitive operations
3. **Input Format**: Text processing typically more cost-effective than images
4. **Resume Capability**: Avoid reprocessing completed items

## Output Files

### Excel Workbooks
- Comprehensive spreadsheets with analysis, raw responses, and issues tracking
- Image thumbnails for visual verification
- Selected vocabulary terms with sources and URIs

### JSON Data
- Structured metadata for programmatic access
- Complete API responses and processing metadata
- Issue synthesis and entity authority records

### Text Reports
- Human-readable vocabulary mapping reports
- Issue content indexes and metadata
- Entity authority reports with statistics
- Processing logs and API usage summaries

### Page-Level Metadata
- Individual text files for each page
- Complete metadata including selected subject headings
- Geographic entities and content warnings
- Suitable for direct archival use

## Features

### Batch Processing
- Automatic batch API usage for large collections
- Progress monitoring and estimated completion times
- Comprehensive error handling and retry logic

### Geographic Entity Processing
- Standardized geographic name formatting
- Separate vocabulary lookup for FAST geographic terms
- Frequency analysis and usage statistics

### Content Warnings
- Automatic detection of potentially sensitive content
- Historical context preservation while flagging concerns

## Privacy & Data Security

### Quality Assurance
- We recommend comprehensive oversight and complete transparency about the metadata creation process
- Comprehensive logging is in place so that any issues that arise may be tracked

### API Usage (Recommended)
- **OpenAI**: Does not use API data for training

### Web Interface Considerations
- Limited privacy guarantees
- Potential use of data for model improvement
- Not recommended for sensitive archival material

## Research Publications/Presentations
- DCMI Annual Conference 2025
- ASIS&T Annual Meeting 2025 (published in Proceedings)
- TCDL 2025

## Team
This project represents ongoing research into AI applications for archival metadata. Contributions are welcome! 
For questions about implementation or research collaboration, please reach out via email. 

- Hannah Moutran: Library Specialist, AI Implementation [hlm2454@my.utexas.edu](mailto:hlm2454@my.utexas.edu)
- Devon Murphy, Metadata Analyst [devon.murphy@austin.utexas.edu​](mailto:devon.murphy@austin.utexas.edu​)
- Karina Sanchez, Scholars Lab Librarian[karinasanchez@austin.utexas.edu](mailto:karinasanchez@austin.utexas.edu)
- Katie Pierce Meyer, Head of Architectural Collections[katiepiercemeyer@austin.utexas.edu](mailto:katiepiercemeyer@austin.utexas.edu)
- Willem Borkgren, Scholars Lab GRA
- Josh Conrad, Digital Initiatives Archival Fellow for the Alexander Architectural Archives

#### Special thanks to Aaron Choate, Director of Research & Strategy at UT Libraries
---

*This pipeline demonstrates the practical application of Large Language Models for archival metadata creation, using controlled vocabularies as tools whereby LLMs can produce high quality first-pass metadata appropriate for academic institutions.*

Commit message:

Refactor print statements for consistency and clarity across workflow scripts; update README for model selection and cost management details.

README.md, after:

# University of Texas at Austin Libraries
## Southern Architect AI Cataloging Project

### Project Overview
This code is part of an ongoing project focused on cataloging the University of Texas at Austin's collection of Southern Architect and Building News journals using Large Language Models (LLMs) to assist in the first-pass metadata creation process. Our research project evaluates the effectiveness of LLMs in enhancing cataloging workflows. In the larger project, we considered both API and web-based interaction with Large Language Models for metadata creation. We presented on this topic at TCDL 2025, and look forward to presenting our work again this year at the DCMI Annual Conference and the ASIS&T Annual Meeting.

[Southern Architect and Building News](https://collections.lib.utexas.edu/?f%5Bmods_relatedItem_titleInfo_title_source_t%5D%5B%5D=Southern+Architect+and+Building+News) was an illustrated monthly journal devoted to the interests of architects, builders, and the hardware trade. It was published from 1882-1932. The collection is currently housed in the Architecture and Planning Library Special Collections at the University of Texas Libraries, The University of Texas at Austin.

### Project Goals
Initially, we tested Large Language Models' ability to contribute effectively in the following metadata tasks: OCR creation/improvement, summarization, named entity extraction, and subject heading assignment. The current implementation has evolved into a comprehensive 5-step w
'[]\

\]]orkflow that integrates controlled vocabularies and produces scholarly-quality archival metadata.

### Workflow Architecture

The processing pipeline consists of five integrated steps that transform raw OCR text or images into comprehensive archival metadata:

#### Step 1: Initial Metadata Extraction
**Scripts**: `southern_architect_step1_text.py`, `southern_architect_step1_image.py`
- Processes OCR text files or image files using OpenAI models
- Generates comprehensive metadata including text transcriptions, content summaries, visual descriptions (image script only), and initial entity extraction
- Supports both individual and batch processing with automatic cost optimization
- Creates Excel workbooks with thumbnails and detailed analysis sheets

#### Step 2: Multi-Vocabulary Enhancement
**Script**: `southern_architect_step2.py`
- Uses 'topics' and geographic entities to search for controlled vocabulary terms
- Queries multiple authoritative sources:
  - **LCSH** (Library of Congress Subject Headings)
  - **FAST** (Faceted Application of Subject Terminology)
  - **Getty AAT** (Art & Architecture Thesaurus)
  - **Getty TGN** (Thesaurus of Geographic Names)
- Caching and comprehensive API logging
- Limited to 3 terms per vocabulary to limit text size of inputs in the next step

#### Step 3: AI-Powered Vocabulary Selection
**Script**: `southern_architect_step3.py`
- Uses OpenAI models to select the most appropriate terms from Step 2 results
- Prompt applies scholarly criteria for historical accuracy and geographical relevance
- Generates page-level metadata files that include OCR
- Creates issue content indexes with comprehensive metadata
- Produces vocabulary mapping report with selection indicators

#### Step 4: Issue-Level Synthesis
**Script**: `southern_architect_step4.py`
- Synthesizes scholarly issue-level descriptions using AI
- LLM selects top 10 subject headings per issue from previously chosen page-level vocabulary terms
- Notes geographic terms with frequency analysis
- Creates comprehensive issue metadata files for each journal issue

#### Step 5: Entity Authority File Creation
**Script**: `southern_architect_step5.py`
- Builds comprehensive authority record for named entities
- Classifies entities by type (Person, Firm, Building, Organization, etc.)
- Tracks frequency, temporal distribution, and variant forms
- Creates both structured JSON and human-readable authority files

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8 or newer
- OpenAI API key
- Required Python packages (see requirements.txt)

### Environment Setup
```bash
# Clone repository
git clone [southern-architect-git-url]

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Set environment variables
export OPENAI_API_KEY="your-api-key-here"
```

### Directory Structure
```
southern_architect/CODE/
├── image_folders/
│   └── {collection}/
│       ├── {issue_1_folder_starting_with_year - e.g.'1917-05-39'}/
│       │   ├── page001.txt (or .jpg/.png)
│       │   ├── page002.txt (or .jpg/.png)
│       │   └── ...
        ├── {issue_2_folder_starting_with_year - e.g.'1924-10-50'}/
            └── ...
├── output_folders/
│   └── SABN_Metadata_Created_{date}_Time_{time}/

```

## Usage

### Complete Workflow (Recommended)
```bash
# Interactive mode - prompts for workflow type
python southern_architect_run.py

# Specify workflow type
python southern_architect_run.py --workflow text
python southern_architect_run.py --workflow image # best results

# Custom model selection - you can also just edit the individual scripts 
python southern_architect_run.py --workflow text --step1-model gpt-4o --step3-model gpt-4o-mini
```

## Cost Management

**Note:** See `model_pricing.py` - Updated as of July 2025

### Cost Optimization Strategies
1. **Batch Processing**: Use for 50% cost reduction on large collections
2. **Model Selection**: Use GPT-4o-mini for cost-sensitive operations
3. **Input Format**: Text processing typically more cost-effective than images
4. **Resume Capability**: Avoid reprocessing completed items

## Output Files

### Excel Workbooks
- Comprehensive spreadsheets with analysis, raw responses, and issues tracking
- Image thumbnails for visual verification
- Selected vocabulary terms with sources and URIs

### JSON Data
- Structured metadata for programmatic access
- Complete API responses and processing metadata
- Issue synthesis and entity authority records

### Text Reports
- Human-readable vocabulary mapping reports
- Issue content indexes and metadata
- Entity authority reports with statistics
- Processing logs and API usage summaries

### Page-Level Metadata
- Individual text files for each page
- Complete metadata including selected subject headings
- Geographic entities and content warnings
- Suitable for direct archival use

## Features

### Batch Processing
- Automatic batch API usage for large collections
- Progress monitoring and estimated completion times
- Comprehensive error handling and retry logic
- Keep in mind that batch processing could potentially take up to 24 hours for *each step* where it is used.  

### Geographic Entity Processing
- Standardized geographic name formatting
- Separate vocabulary lookup for FAST geographic terms
- Frequency analysis and usage statistics

### Content Warnings
- Automatic detection of potentially sensitive content
- Historical context preservation while flagging concerns

## Privacy & Data Security

### Quality Assurance
- In all AI assisted workflows, we recommend: comprehensive oversight *and* complete transparency
- Comprehensive logging is in place so that any issues that arise may be tracked

### API Usage (Recommended)
- **OpenAI**: Does not use API data for training, for more information visit: [OpenAI Enterprise Privacy](https://openai.com/enterprise-privacy/)

### Web Interface Considerations
- Limited privacy guarantees
- Potential use of data for model improvement
- Not recommended for sensitive archival material

## Research Publications/Presentations
- DCMI Annual Conference 2025
- ASIS&T Annual Meeting 2025 (published in Proceedings)
- TCDL 2025

## Team
This project represents ongoing research into AI applications for archival metadata. Contributions are welcome! 
For questions about implementation or research collaboration, please reach out via email. 

- Hannah Moutran: Library Specialist, AI Implementation [hlm2454@my.utexas.edu](mailto:hlm2454@my.utexas.edu)
- Devon Murphy, Metadata Analyst [devon.murphy@austin.utexas.edu​](mailto:devon.murphy@austin.utexas.edu​)
- Karina Sanchez, Scholars Lab Librarian[karinasanchez@austin.utexas.edu](mailto:karinasanchez@austin.utexas.edu)
- Katie Pierce Meyer, Head of Architectural Collections[katiepiercemeyer@austin.utexas.edu](mailto:katiepiercemeyer@austin.utexas.edu)
- Willem Borkgren, Scholars Lab GRA
- Josh Conrad, Digital Initiatives Archival Fellow for the Alexander Architectural Archives

#### Special thanks to Aaron Choate, Director of Research & Strategy at UT Libraries
---

*This pipeline demonstrates the practical application of Large Language Models for archival metadata creation, using controlled vocabularies as tools whereby LLMs can produce high quality first-pass metadata appropriate for academic institutions.*
